. Natural Language Ontology as an Emerging Discipline and Practice
1.1 Natural Language Ontology as a Discipline
The subject matter of natural language ontology is the ontology implicit in natural language, which is to be distinguished from the ontologies of the various metaphysical theories or naïve philosophical views formulated by using natural language. Natural language ontology has as its task to uncover the ontology that is reflected in relevant sorts of linguistic intuitions, setting aside the question whether that ontology is real or merely apparent.

This entry uses “natural language ontology” as the term for the discipline and “the ontology of natural language” as a term for its subject matter. The more accurate term for the subject matter of natural language ontology would actually be “the ontologies of natural languages”, since natural languages may, in principle, reflect different ontologies and even the same language (or idiolect) might reflect different ontologies. For most of the entry, this is simplified by talking about the ontology of natural language, addressing the issue of different ontologies only in Section 4. This is justified by the fact that philosophers practicing natural language ontology generally presuppose that there is a single ontology shared by natural languages, as do, to a great extent at least, semanticists.

Natural language ontology had been suggested as a discipline first by Bach (1986), who uses the term “natural language metaphysics”. That term is in a sense more adequate than “natural language ontology”: ontology is often taken to be narrower than metaphysics, dealing just with what there is (the inventory of things) rather than, as metaphysics does, with the nature of things (Quine 1948). However, “ontology” is increasingly used in the broader sense of metaphysics as well, especially when it has an empirical or applied dimension (e.g., “applied ontology”, a field of study that involves the practical application of ontological notions and theories to specific domains, such as management, biomedicine, or geography), a usage this entry will adopt as well. Also the count noun “ontology” is better usable than “metaphysics” to denote the subject matter of a branch of metaphysics since it comes with a plural, allowing talk about “the ontologies of natural languages” and “different ontologies” being the subject matter of different branches of metaphysics.

The ontology (or metaphysics) of natural language needs to be distinguished from the ontology of linguistic entities, words, meanings, phonemes, etc. Sometimes the term “metaphysics of natural language” is used for the study of the latter (Postal 2018).

Bach (1986) conceives of natural language metaphysics somewhat differently than the present entry in that for him it is just part of linguistics, not of philosophy. For Bach, whereas proper metaphysics is concerned with the question “what sort of things are there?”, natural language metaphysics is concerned with the question “what sort of things do people talk as if there were?” Bach goes on saying

Is there Natural Language Metaphysics? How could there not? […] Do the overt and covert distinctions that correspond to natural language categories correspond to the structure of the world? How could they not? But this is where linguistics stops. (1986: 593)

Bach then adopts agnosticism as to the ontological and cognitive status of the entities that are posited as semantic values. The view that natural language metaphysics is part only of linguistics has also been adopted by Fiorin & Delfitto (2020: chap. 14), who characterize it as

the practice of identifying and studying the qualitative differences between the objects in the model that are relevant to the interpretation of natural languages, (2020: 117)

whereby a model is strictly motivated by linguistic data.

1.2 Natural Language Ontology as a Practice Throughout the History of Philosophy
Natural language ontology as a discipline whose subject matter is the ontology implicit in natural language is a developing discipline that, on the view adopted in this entry, is part of both metaphysics and natural language semantics. But in a way it has also been a practice throughout the history of philosophy. Throughout the history of philosophy, at times more often than others, natural language has been used as method for clarifying intuitions, that is, states of intellectual seeming that contrast, very roughly, with inferential belief, reasoning or reflection and that have been considered the primary evidence in philosophy (see entry on intuition). In particular, natural language has played an important role in clarifying intuitions that bear on metaphysical issues.

Natural language has been used, for example, by Fine (2003) to elucidate the intuitive distinction between an object and the material constituting it While the statue may seem a distinct entity from the alloy that constitutes it, the distinction becomes particularly convincing when paying attention to ranges of predicates that are or aren’t meaningfully applicable to the statue and the alloy. The statue can be said to be “defective”, “well made”, “valuable”, “ugly”, “Romanesque”, “insured”, or “admired”, even though the alloy which makes it up is not. Some predicates may not hold of the alloy; others cannot even be applied meaningfully to it, e.g., Romanesque. A philosopher that denies an ontological distinction between an object and the matter constituting it faces the considerable challenge of explaining those differences in the applicability of predicates.

Another ontological distinction that has been elucidated significantly using natural language is the distinction between objects and events. While some philosophers take objects and events to be of the same category and identify both with the material content of space-time regions, others distinguish them in the way they persist through time (endurance and perdurance, see entry on identity over time). Natural language gives significant support for the view that objects and events relate to time and space differently. The difference is reflected in the choice of existence predicates: exist applies to objects, but occur, take place, happen to events (* The palace existed / ??? happened, The murder happened / ??? existed)); it also reflected in the applicability of spatial modifiers to the respective existence predicates (The party took place in the garden, ??? The flowers existed in the garden) (Hacker 1982; Cresswell 1986; Fine 2006; Moltmann 2020b).

Philosophers when making use of natural language in such ways to clarify metaphysical intuitions practice natural language ontology (even if no distinction is made yet between what is reflected in such intuitions and what there really is, which is discussed in the next section). They thereby generally presuppose that metaphysical intuitions do not show interpersonal inconsistencies (see entry on intuitions) and in their linguistic manifestation, cross-linguistic differences (§4.2).

Appeals to natural language of this kind can be found within different approaches to metaphysics, as long as the philosophers in questions take metaphysical intuitions to be a basis for developing philosophical views. They can be found, for example, in Aristotle and very explicitly in medieval metaphysics (Aquinas, Buridan, Ockham), where the use of natural language examples was a common practice. It can be found in the phenomenological tradition (Bolzano, Brentano, Husserl, Meinong), and, again quite explicitly, in early analytic philosophy (Frege, Twardowski, Strawson, Austin, Vendler, Ryle). Drawing on natural language as a method of clarifying metaphysical intuitions is also common among many contemporary philosophers that do not explicitly engage in natural language ontology as an emerging discipline, but just take a descriptive approach to metaphysics (§1.6).

1.3 The Ontology of Natural Language and Its Relation to Reality
There are various ways in which philosophers have used natural language to clarify metaphysical intuitions. One of the most common ways in which philosophers draw on language concerns the denotations of particular types of referential noun phrases (NPs). It is a standard assumption in both philosophy and linguistics that referential NPs stand for entities and predicates express properties of entities. The types of predicates acceptable with a particular type of referential NP are thus indicative of the ontological category of the entities that that type of NP denotes. The types of NPs philosophers make use of include bare adjective nominalizations like wisdom when arguing for qualities or properties, deverbal nominalizations like laughter when arguing for events, modified adjective nominalizations like Socrates’ wisdom when arguing for tropes or particularized properties (see entry on tropes), NPs with a relational use of number such as the number of planets when arguing for numbers as objects, and fact-referring terms like the fact that it is raining or the facts when discussing the nature and role of facts (Austin 1950; Strawson 1950). Other ways in which natural language appears to reflect ontology and which have played a role in philosophy will be discussed later (§2.2).

The appeal to natural language in the history of philosophy was generally based on the assumption that natural language just reflects reality and that natural language thus provides a particularly manifest indication for the way reality should be understood. While the view is still present in some of the ways in which contemporary metaphysicians draw on natural language, there is another view that has gained prominence, and that is that natural language does not in fact reflect the ontology of what there really is, or at least not fundamental reality. Rather, natural language comes with an ontology that may be quite different from what many philosophers consider the ontology of the real.

For example, a lot of referential NPs in natural language seem to stand for entities that many philosophers would not consider real, let alone fundamental. These include ontologically dependent, minor, and derivative objects such as holes, shadows, smiles, homes, problems, reasons, advantages, and mistakes, as well as construction-driven objects such as pluralities like “the stones in the garden” (§3.1.1), functional, variable, or intensional objects like “the increasing temperature” or “the book John needs to write” (§3.1.1), and intentional objects of the sort “the house John was dreaming about” (§3.2).

There are also predicates of natural language that reflect notions that diverge from corresponding “philosophical” notions, such as the verb exist, which cannot convey the univocal notion that can be conveyed by philosophical uses of the noun existence (as in the existence of everything there is) (§1.2).

Also categorial distinctions such as the mass-count distinction, which includes a distinction between “the water” and “the quantity of water”, “the rice” and “the rice grains”, as well as “the clothes” and “the clothing”, are nowadays not generally taken to reflect a real ontological distinction, but, at best, a distinction at a level of “grammaticized individuation” (§3.3).

Such discrepancies motivate distinguishing two ways of pursuing metaphysics:

metaphysics whose aim is to uncover the ontology reflected in natural language or intuitions more generally, that is, descriptive metaphysics
metaphysics whose aim is to uncover what there really is, that is, foundational metaphysics.
This distinction raises important questions itself, though.

First of all, how should reality itself be understood? Does reality just consist in what is fundamental, and if so what entities or ontological category would be fundamental (e.g., certain sorts of objects, properties or facts), and in what sense of fundamentality? (see entries on fundamentality and metaphysical realism). Or does reality also include ordinary objects (which are generally not considered fundamental), and perhaps entities ontologically dependent on them (such as tropes and events, or even entities like shadows and holes), and in what sense of ontological dependence (see entry on ontological dependence)? Or does reality consist of a much greater range of entities, even perhaps a plenitude of just anything x that is conceivable that meets the conditions for x’s existence (Eklund 2008; Schaffer 2009; entry on existence)? Does reality consist of a single level of being or different levels ordered by relations of grounding or fundamentality, and would there be a single such relation or a plurality of relations? (see entries on metaphysical grounding and fundamentality). Does reality come with a structure at all or is it an “amorphous lump”, to be carved out in one way or another by language? Finally, should reality include a realm of mere possibilia and perhaps nonexistent, merely intentional objects (see entries on possible objects and nonexistent objects)? Depending on how reality itself is conceived, the ontology of natural language may or may not be viewed as an ontology of the real (see also §2.2.5).

A second question is whether the two metaphysical projects can be pursued independently of each other. While many contemporary metaphysicians aim to pursue [ii] without engaging in [i], Fine (2017a) argues that the two branches of metaphysics cannot be pursued independently, but that [ii] presupposes [i]: metaphysics that aims to figure out what there really is has to take descriptive metaphysics or what Fine calls “naïve metaphysics” or “the metaphysics of appearances” as its starting point, that is, the metaphysics whose aim is to uncover the ontology reflected in our intuitions or ordinary judgments. That is because naïve (or descriptive) metaphysics provides the clarification of the metaphysical notions that foundational metaphysics aims to explain in more fundamental terms.

A third issue is whether metaphysics that aims to uncover what there really is can even be pursued in the first place. There have been various movements in metaphysics that deny that, including Kantian and phenomenological approaches (§2.1). In fact, natural language ontology might very well be pursued while taking a skeptical stance toward the metaphysics of the real.

1.4 The Ontology of Natural Language and Truth Conditions
Some central issues in natural language ontology bear on the question of how reality and existence are to be understood.

One of them concerns natural language ontology itself, when its subject matter is an ontology that may diverge from the ontology of what is considered real. How is natural language ontology compatible with what is widely regarded as a fundamental requirement on semantic theory, namely that of giving truth conditions? For a sentence S about an entity d to be true or false, what makes S true or false, it seems, needs to be a part of reality that includes d itself, and thus d needs to be a real entity, rather than part of an ontology of “appearances”. There are various options to pursue, each of which may be adopted for just some part of the ontology reflected in natural language. One option is that natural language displays ontological notions or items that simply fail to be real, and thus speakers making use of them in their utterances are in error. Second, entities in the ontology of natural language may have the status of fictional entities, which means that a sentence about such entities may not be able to be “really” be true (unless it predicates a property of the fictional entity as a fictional entity, with predicates such as is a fictional character) (see entry on nonexistent objects, section nuclear and extranuclear properties). Third, entities in the ontology of natural language, even if not considered fundamental, may be considered derivative, yet real, which would allow sentences involving reference to them to be true. As was mentioned in Section 1.1, some proponents of natural language ontology remain agnostic regarding the metaphysical status of the items that natural language ontology posits, as long as they are motivated by empirical generalizations and theoretical linguistic considerations.

Another general issue, skeptically addressed in particular by Chomsky, is whether referential NPs even have as their semantic function to be used to refer to entities and thus whether referentialist semantics is even possible (§2.2.5). Not all approaches to natural language semantics in fact have as their aim giving truth conditions (whether such an aim is set aside or abandoned) and thus rely on referentialist semantics. Chomsky (2000) himself takes the view that the semantics of natural language can involve only our cognitive representation of the world and thus only another level of syntax, not entities and their properties themselves.

